# Java Programming
## Content
[**Java Basics**](#java-basics)
- [Running Java Programs](#running-java-programs)
- [Hello World](#hello-world)
- [Print Statements](#print-statements)
- [Comments](#comments)
- [Methods in Java](#methods-in-java)
[**Data Types and Syntax**](#data-types-and-syntax)
- [Class](#class)
- [Method](#method)
- [Primitive DataTypes](#primitive-datatypes)
- [Reference Types / Derived Types / Objects](#reference-types--derived-types--objects)
- [Escape Sequences](#escape-sequences)
- [Using the Char](#using-the-char)
- [Methods of the Character Class](#methods-of-the-character-class)
- [Statement Terminators](#statement-terminators)
- [Reserved words or Keywords](#reserved-words-or-keywords)
[**Java Variables**](#java-variables)
- [Variable Notation](#variable-notation)
- [Identifiers](#identifiers)
- [Declaring Variables in Java](#declaring-variables-in-java)
- [Declaring multiple variables within the same line](#declaring-multiple-variables-within-the-same-line)
- [Constants in Java](#constants-in-java)
- [Literals](#literals)
[**Manipulating Variables**](#manipulating-variables)
- [Arithmetic operators](#arithmetic-operators)
- [Compound Assignment Operators](#compound-assignment-operators)
- [Increment and Decrement Operators](#increment-and-decrement-operators)
- [Math in Java](#math-in-java)
- [Math class for Arithmetic Operations](#math-class-for-arithmetic-operations)
- [Accuracy of Floating-Point Numbers](#accuracy-of-floating-point-numbers)
- [Scientific Notation](#scientific-notation)
- [Data Conversion](#data-conversion)
- [Augmented Expressions](#augmented-expressions)
[**Classes**](#classes)
- [State and Behavior](#state-and-behavior)
- [Class Syntax](#class-syntax)
- [Head of a class](#head-of-a-class)
- [Constructor](#constructor)
- [Instance Fields](#instance-fields)
- [Parameters && Arguments](#parameters--arguments)
- [Methods](#methods)
- [System.out.println(CustomClass)](#systemoutprintlncustomclass)
- [Initialize a New Object from a Class](#initialize-a-new-object-from-a-class)
- [Scanner Class](#scanner-class)
[**Methods**](#methods)
- [Method declaration](#method-declaration)
- [Static vs Non-Static](#static-vs-non-static)
[System Class](#system-class)
- [System Data and Time Methods](#system-data-and-time-methods)
[**Non-Primitive Data Types**](#non-primitive-data-types)
- [Strings](#strings)
- [String Concatenation](#string-concatenation)
- [Reading a String from the Console](#reading-a-string-from-the-console)
- [Comparing Strings](#comparing-strings)
- [ Index of a Character in a String](#index-of-a-character-in-a-string)
- [Convert a String to a Number](#convert-a-string-to-a-number)
- [Format a String with printf()](#format-a-string-with-printf)
- [Object Methods and Properties](#object-methods-and-properties)

## Java Basics 

Java was developed by Sun Microsystems in 1995. It is a high-level programming language that is platform-independent, meaning that it can run on any operating system that has a Java Virtual Machine (JVM). Java is used to develop a wide variety of applications, from web applications to mobile applications to enterprise applications.

### Running Java Programs

**javac** is the Java compiler that converts Java source code into bytecode. The bytecode is then run by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).
> USE JAVAC TO COMPILE JAVA PROGRAMS BEFORE RUNNING THEM

**java** is the Java interpreter that runs the bytecode generated by the Java compiler.
> USE JAVA TO RUN JAVA PROGRAMS

**Example:**
```terminal
javac HelloWorld.java
// This will compile the Java program into bytecode

ls
HelloWorld.class HelloWorld.java

java HelloWorld
//This will run the recently compiled Java program
//Running compiled Java programs does not require the .class extension
```
### Hello World 

The first line of code any developer will see when learning a new programming language is the "Hello, World!" program. This program is used to demonstrate the basic syntax of the language. Here is the "Hello, World!" program in Java:

```Java
public class HelloWorld {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello World!");
  }
}
```

While Java programs are used on different platforms they are written using a .java file. The name of the file should be the same as the class name or the primary class in the file.
- The `Hello World` program is run in a file called `HelloWorld.java` and the only class in that file is `HelloWorld`. 
    - Classes can be thought of as a single concept or object that is used to define the structure of an object.
    - the domain of a class is everythong within the classes curly braces `{}`
    - each file has one primary class the file is named after
- Methods are used to define the behavior of a class. The `main` method is the entry point of a Java program.
    - similar to classes, methods also have a domain that is defined by the curly braces `{}`


### Print Statements

Print statements output information to the console. 

In the line ```System.out.println("Hello World!");```
- `System` is a built-in Java class that contains useful tools for programs 
- `out` is short for output 
- `println` is short for print line

There are multiple methods of creating a log to a console. 
- `System.out.println()` print statements to the console on a line by itself
- `System.out.print()` prints the output to the console without a new line
- `System.out.printf()` prints a formatted string to the console

### Comments
There are multiple ways to right comments.

**Short Comments** usually just need the basic double slash syntax that is common to many programming languages. 
Example:
```Java
// This is a short comment
```

**Long Comments** are used to describe the purpose of a class or method. They are written between `/*` and `*/`.
Example:
```Java
/*
This is a long comment
It can span multiple lines
*/
```

**Javadoc Comments** are used to create documentation for a class or method. They are written between `/**` and `*/`. JavaDoc comments are used for creating documentation for classes and methods. They are written in a specific format that can be read by the JavaDoc tool to generate documentation in HTML format.
Example:
```Java
/**
 * This is a Javadoc comment
 * It is used to create documentation for a class or method
 */
```

### Methods in Java

A method  is a set of code that is referred to by name and can be called (invoked) at any point in a program simply by utilizing the method's name. Methods are used to perform certain actions, and they are also known as functions.

**Every Java program needs a method called MAIN** which is the entry point for that file.java. The main method is the first method that is called when a Java program is run. 

**Example:**
```Java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    // code to be executed
}
```

Methods have a **Signature** **which is the method name and the parameters that the method takes.** The signature of a method is used to identify the method and distinguish it from other methods in the program.

## Import statements
Import statements are used to import classes from other packages. The `import` keyword is used to import classes from other packages. 

There are **two types of import statements** in Java:
- **Implicit** or **Single-type import**: This imports a single class from a package.
- **Explicit** 0r **On-demand import**: This imports all the classes from a package.
The `java.util` package contains the Scanner class, which is used to get user input in Java.

**Example:**
```Java
import java.util.Scanner;
```

## Data Types and Syntax

### Class
A class in Java is a method that defines the structure of an object. It is a blueprint that defines the properties and behaviors of an object. A class can contain fields (variables) and methods (functions).

Classes should begin with a capital letter and follow PascalCase.

### Method
A method is a block of code that performs a specific task. It is a set of code that is referred to by name and can be called (invoked) at any point in a program simply by utilizing the method's name. Methods are used to perform certain actions, and they are also known as functions.

Methods should begin with a lowercase letter and follow camelCase.


### Primitive DataTypes

Primitive Data types that store simple values 

**int** - stores positive or negative whole numbers (without decimals) as well as 0  
- allows values between -2,147,483,648 and 2,147,483,647  

**float** - stores floating-point numbers  

**double** - stores decimal numbers, very large numbers, very small numbers, and is more precise than float
- the maximum value is 1.7976931348623157 * E308 which is 17 followed by 307 zeros
- the minimum value is 4.9 * E-324 which is 4.9 led by 324 zeros

**char** - stores single characters  
- single quotes are used to define a char
- can hold a letter, space, number, or special character

**boolean** - stores true or false values  

**byte** - stores 8-bit integers  
    - used to save memory in large arrays when memory savings are crucial   

**short** - stores 16-bit integers  
    - double the size of a byte   

**long** - stores 64-bit integers  

### Reference Types / Derived Types / Objects 
Reference types are created by the developer and are used to reference data. 


**Strings** - objects that hold sequences of characters.
- Strings can be created by using string literals
    - String literals are created by enclosing the text in double quotes.
    - Example: `String myString = "Hello World!";`
-  or by calling the string class
    - alternatively you can create a string object by calling the string class
    - Example: `String myString = new String("Hello World!");`

**arrays**  -

**classes** -

**interfaces** -

### Escape Sequences
Escape sequences are used to represent characters that are difficult or impossible to type directly. They are used to perform various tasks such as adding a new line, tab, or double quote to a string.

An example of an escape sequence is adding double quotes to a string without the compiler perceiving those double quotes as the end of the string.
- Example: `String myString = "Hello \"World\"!";`  
    - prints `Hello "World"!`

Certain characters need to be escaped to ensure they are properly formatted in objects like strings. The backslash `\` is used to escape characters in Java and, whenever used in a string or some other object may need to be escaped itself which looks like `\\`.

The **Newline** character `\n` is used to create a new line in a string. When it is used in a string, it will create a new line in the output.
- Example: `String myString = "Hello\nWorld!";`  
    - prints 
    ```
    Hello
    World!
    ```

### Using the Char

**Char** or the character data type, the **unicode** or the **ASCII** value of a character can be used to represent the character.
- **Unicode** is a universal character encoding standard that assigns a unique number to every character in every language.
- **ASCII** is a character encoding standard that assigns a unique number to each character in the English language.

The char data type can be used as a unicode or ASCII character value where the value of a capital letter can be compared to other capital letters and the value of a lowercase letter can be compared to other lowercase letters.

**Example:**
```Java
char myChar = 'A';
System.out.println((int) myChar); // 65

char myChar = 'a';
System.out.println((int) myChar); // 97


if (myChar >= 'A' && myChar <= 'Z') {
    System.out.println("The character is a capital letter.");
} else if (myChar >= 'a' && myChar <= 'z') {
    System.out.println("The character is a lowercase letter.");
} else if (myChar >= '0' && myChar <= '9') {
    System.out.println("The character is a number.");
} else {
    System.out.println("The character is a special character.");
}
```

### Methods of the Character Class 
The `Character` class in Java is a part of the `java.lang` package and provides methods for working with characters. The `Character` class is a wrapper class for the `char` primitive data type.

| Method | Description | Example | Returns |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| isDigit() | Returns true if the character is a digit | Character.isDigit('5') | true |
| isLetter() | Returns true if the character is a letter | Character.isLetter('A') | true |
| isLetterOrDigit() | Returns true if the character is a letter or digit | Character.isLetterOrDigit('5') | true |
| isLowerCase() | Returns true if the character is a lowercase letter | Character.isLowerCase('a') | true |
| isUpperCase() | Returns true if the character is an uppercase letter | Character.isUpperCase('A') | true |
| toLowerCase() | Converts the character to lowercase | Character.toLowerCase('A') | 'a' |
| toUpperCase() | Converts the character to uppercase | Character.toUpperCase('a') | 'A' |


### Statement Terminators
While it is incredibly annoying, ensure that lines are ended with a semi-colon or the program will not compile.  
- **Example:**
```Java
System.out.println("Hello World!");
```

### Reserved words or Keywords

Reserved words are words that have a special meaning in Java and cannot be used as identifiers (variable names, class names, method names, etc.). Some examples of reserved words in Java are `public`, `class`, `static`, `void`, `int`, `String`, `if`, `else`, `while`, `for`, `return`, `break`, `continue`, `switch`, `case`, `default`, `try`, `catch`, `finally`, `throw`, `throws`, `new`, `this`, `super`, `true`, `false`, `null`, `instanceof`, `import`, `package`, `interface`, `extends`, `implements`, `abstract`, `final`, `private`, `protected`, `public`, `static`, `synchronized`, `volatile`, `transient`, `native`, `strictfp`, `class`, `enum`, `interface`, `byte`, `short`, `int`, `long`, `float`, `double`, `char`, `boolean`, `void`.

## Java Variables

### Variable Notation 

In Java programming, a multitude of variable notation is used for the purpose of readability and consistency.

- **Camel Casing** is the practice of writing compound words or phrases where the first word is lower case and each subsequent word begins with a capital letter.
    - Example: `myVariableName`

- **Pascal Casing** is the practice of writing compound words or phrases where each word begins with a capital letter.
    - Example: `MyVariableName`

- **Hungarian Notation** is the practice of writing compound words where the data type leads the variable followed by the variable name.
    - Example: `intMyVariableName`

- **Snake Casing** is the practice of writing compound words or phrases where each word is separated by an underscore.
    - Example: `my_variable_name`

### Identifiers 

**Identifiers** are used to name classes, methods, variables, and other entities in a Java program. Identifiers must follow certain rules and conventions.

- Identifiers must begin with a letter, underscore `_`, or dollar sign `$`.
- Identifiers can contain letters, digits, underscores, and dollar signs.
- Identifiers are case-sensitive.
- Identifiers cannot be a reserved word.

**Example:**
```Java
int myVariable = 5;
String myString = "Hello, World!";
```

### Declaring Variables in Java

Variables are declared with there data type followed by the variable name. 

A variable without a value is called an **uninitialized variable**.

**Example:**
```Java
//Int represents the integer value type
int age;
```

A variable that uses the assignment operator `=` is called an **initialized variable**.

**Example:**
```Java
// assign the value 25 to the variable age
int age = 25;
```

**Instance variables** are declared within a class but outside of any method, constructor, or block. They are initialized when the class is instantiated.
    - instance variable have class level scope
    - they are created when an object of the class is instantiated and destroyed when the object is destroyed.
**Example:**
```Java
class person {
    // instance variable
    String name;
    int age;
}
```

**Class variables** are declared with the `static` keyword. They are initialized when the class is loaded.
    - class variables have class level scope
    - dont have to create an instance of the class to access the class variable
**Example** 
```Java
class person {
    // class variable
    static String name;
    static int age;
}
```

### Declaring multiple variables within the same line

Multiple variables can be declared on the same line by separating them with a comma.

**Example:**
```Java
int x, y, z;

string firstName, lastName;
```

Alternatively multiple variables can be declared on the same line and initialized with the same value by separating them with a semicolon.

**Example:**
```Java
int x = 5; y = 10; z = 15;
```

### Constants in Java

Constants are variables whose values cannot be changed once they are assigned. In Java, constants are declared with the `final` keyword.
- declared using the final keyword.
- constants are written in uppercase snake casing.

**Example:**
```Java
final int MAX_VALUE = 100;
final string COMPANY_NAME = "Tech Elevator";
```

### Literals
A literal is a constant value that is used in a program. In Java, there are different types of literals, such as integer literals, floating-point literals, character literals, string literals, and boolean literals.

Literals are used to represent fixed values in a program. They are used to assign values to variables, pass values as arguments to methods, and perform other operations.

```Java
int x = 5; // 5 is an integer literal
double y = 5.0; // 5.0 is a floating-point literal
char z = 'A'; // 'A' is a character literal
String s = "Hello"; // "Hello" is a string literal
```

| Literal | Description | Example |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Integer Literal | A whole number without a decimal point | 5 |
| Floating-Point Literal | A number with a decimal point | 5.0 |
| Character Literal | A single character enclosed in single quotes | 'A' |
| String Literal | A sequence of characters enclosed in double quotes | "Hello" |
| Boolean Literal | A value that is either true or false | true |
| Null Literal | A value that represents the absence of a value | null |

When creating literals, it is important to use letters trailing behind the number to indicate the data type of the literal. This is important because Java will default to an integer data type if a letter is not used to indicate the data type of the literal.

**Example:**
```Java
// L indicates a long literal
long x = 5L;

// F indicates a float literal
float y = 5.0F;

// D indicates a double literal
double z = 5.0D;
```


## Manipulating Variables
The data type of a variable plays some role in determining what mathematical operations can be performed on it.

### Arithmetic operators
Arithmetic operators are used to perform mathematical operations on variables.

| Operator | Description | Example| Returns |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| + | Addition | 5 + 3 | 8 |
| - | Subtraction | 5 - 3 | 2 |
| * | Multiplication | 5 * 3 | 15 |
| / | Division | 5 / 3 | 1 |
| % | Modulus | 5 % 3 | 2 |

### Compund Assignment Operators
Compound assignment operators are used to perform an arithmetic operation and assign the result to a variable in a single step.

| Operator | Description | Example | Equivalent |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| += | Addition assignment | x += 3 | x = x + 3 |
| -= | Subtraction assignment | x -= 3 | x = x - 3 |
| *= | Multiplication assignment | x *= 3 | x = x * 3 |
| /= | Division assignment | x /= 3 | x = x / 3 |
| %= | Modulus assignment | x %= 3 | x = x % 3 |

### Increment and Decrement Operators
| Operator | Description | Example | Returns |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ++x | pre-Increment | **var | add 1 && use the new value in the statement |
| --x | pre-Decrement | --var | minus 1 && use the new value in the statement |
| x++ | post-Increment | var++ | add 1 but use the old value in the statement |
| x-- | post-Decrement | var-- | minus 1 but use the new value in the statement |

### Math in Java
Arithmetic performed on different data types results in different values as resultants. 

**Example:**
```Java
// integer division results in truncated answers 
5 / 3 = 1

// double division results in a decimal answer
5.0 / 3.0 = 1.6666666666666667

// modulus returns the remainder of a division
5 % 3 = 2
```

Certain data types should be used for specific operations. For example, using the floating-point data type for division will result in a more accurate answer than using the integer data type but even when simple addition is performed on floats, the answer may still be inaccurate.  
This is due to the way that floating-point numbers are stored in memory.  
**Example:**
```Java
// floating-point numbers are not always accurate
System.out.Println(1.0 - 0.1 - 0.1 - 0.1 - 0.1 - 0.1)
// prints 0.5000000000000001

System.out.Println(1.0 - 0.9)
// prints 0.09999999999999998
```

### Math class for Arithmetic Operations
The `Math` class in Java provides methods for performing mathematical operations. The `Math` class is part of the `java.lang` package, which is automatically imported into every Java program.

| Method | Description | Example | Returns |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| abs() | Returns the absolute value of a number | Math.abs(-5) | 5 |
| ceil() | Returns the smallest integer that is greater than or equal to the argument | Math.ceil(5.1) | 6.0 |
| floor() | Returns the largest integer that is less than or equal to the argument | Math.floor(5.9) | 5.0 |
| max() | Returns the larger of two numbers | Math.max(5, 3) | 5 |
| min() | Returns the smaller of two numbers | Math.min(5, 3) | 3 |
| pow() | Returns the value of the first argument raised to the power of the second argument | Math.pow(2, 3) | 8.0 |
| random() | Returns a random number between 0.0 and 1.0 | Math.random() | 0.123456789 |
| round() | Returns the closest integer to the argument | Math.round(5.5) | 6 |
| sqrt() | Returns the square root of the argument | Math.sqrt(25) | 5.0 |
| toDegrees() | Converts an angle from radians to degrees | Math.toDegrees(Math.PI) | 180.0 |
| toRadians() | Converts an angle from degrees to radians | Math.toRadians(180.0) | 3.141592653589793 |

Multiple math class methods can be used in conjunction with one another to perform complex operations.
**Example:**
```Java
// Math class methods
System.out.println(Math.pow(2,Math.abs(-5))); // 5
//prints 32.0 or 2 to the power of 5
```

### Accuracy of Floating-Point Numbers
Floating-point numbers are not always accurate due to the way they are stored in memory. This can lead to inaccuracies when performing arithmetic operations on floating-point numbers. 

When in doubt, it is best to used the `BigDecimal` class to perform arithmetic operations on floating-point numbers. The `BigDecimal` class is part of the `java.math` package and is used to perform arbitrary-precision arithmetic.

OR just use double data types for most operations and only use the `BigDecimal` class when precision is crucial.

Integers can also be used to perform arithmetic operations on floating-point numbers where the decimal place can be moved to the right by multiplying the number by a power of 10.

### Scientific Notation
Scientific notation is a way of expressing very large or very small numbers in a more compact form. 

To use scientific notation in Java, the letter `E` is used to indicate the power of 10 by which the number is multiplied.

**Example:**
```Java
double x = 1.234E3; // 1234.0
double y = 1.234E-3; // 0.001234
```

### Data Conversion

Data conversion is the process of converting data from one data type to another. In Java, data conversion can be done implicitly or explicitly.

Java will automatically convert data from one data type to another if the operation falls into one of these rules and in this order:
1. If one of the operands is a double, the other operand will be converted to a double.
2. If one of the operands is a float, the other operand will be converted to a float.
3. If one of the operands is a long, the other operand will be converted to a long.
4. If one of the operands is an int, the other operand will be converted to an int.

This is referred to as **implicit data conversion** meaning there is no need to explicitly (manually) convert the data type.

**Explicit Casting** is the process of manually converting data from one data type to another. This is done by placing the desired data type in parentheses before the value to be converted.

**Example:**
```Java
double x = 1.234;
int y = (int) x; 
// Explicit casting HAS to be used to inform Java the truncation of the decimal and trailing values is intentional
```

### Augmented Expressions
Augmented expressions are a shorthand way of performing arithmetic operations and assigning the result to a variable.

**Example:**
```Java
int x = 5;
x += 3; // x is now 8
```

An augmented expression of the form `x += y` is equivalent to `x = x + y`. The same applies to other arithmetic operators.

## Classes 
Classes are templates for creating objects in Java. They define the properties and behaviors of objects. A class is a blueprint for creating objects, and objects are instances of classes.

There are built-in , predefined classes in Java that are part of the Java API (Application Programming Interface). These classes are part of the `java.lang` package, which is automatically imported into every Java program.

There also means of creating custom classes in Java which are used to define the structure of objects that are specific to a program.

### State and Behavior

Classes have two main components: **state** and **behavior**.

- **State** is represented by fields (variables) that store the data of an object. The state of an object is defined by the values of its fields. 

- **Behavior** is represented by methods (functions) that define the actions that an object can perform. The behavior of an object is defined by the methods that it can execute.

**Example:**
```Java
public class Car {
    // state
    String color;
    int mpg;
    boolean isElectric;

    // behavior
    public void drive() {
        System.out.println("The car is driving.");
    }
}
```

### Class Syntax

```Java
public class ClassName {
  // class body

    // fields (variables)
    int x;
    String y;

    // constructor
    public ClassName(int x, String y) {
        this.x = x;
        this.y = y;
    }

    // methods
    public void printValues() {
        System.out.println("x: " + x);
        System.out.println("y: " + y);
    }


}
```

### Head of a class
The **head of a class** is defined by the class keyword followed by the class name and the class body is defined by the curly braces `{}`.  
The head includes features like the class name, access modifiers, and the class keyword.
- **Public** is an access modifier that specifies that the class is accessible from any other class.

- **Static** means the variable or function is shared between all instances of that class as it belongs to the class and not to any specific instance of the class.

- **Void** is a keyword that is used to define a method that does not return a value.

**Example:**
```java
public class ClassName {
  // class body
}
```

### **Constructor** 
is a special method that is used to initialize objects. It is called when an object of a class is created. 
- The constructor ***constructs*** a new instance of the class.
- The name of the constructor function must be the same as the class name.
- classes are defined as public so that they can be accessed from other classes.

**Example:**
```Java
public ClassName(int x, String y) {
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
}
```

Classes can have multiple constructors and are differentiated by their signature. The compiler will decide which constructor function to use based on the arguments passed to the Classes object. 

**Example:**
```Java
public class Car { 
  public String color; 
  public int mpg; 
  public boolean isElectric; 

  // constructor 1 
  public Car(String carColor, int milesPerGallon) { 
    color = carColor; 
    mpg = milesPerGallon; 
  } 

  // constructor 2 
  public Car(boolean electricCar, int milesPerGallon) { 
    isElectric = electricCar; 
    mpg = milesPerGallon; 
  } 
}
```

**Example Usage**
```Java
// uses constructor 1
Car myCar = new Car("red", 25);

// uses constructor 2
Car myElectricCar = new Car(true, 100);
```

If ***no constructor is defined*** in a class, Java will automatically create a default constructor that takes no arguments and applies default values to the instance fields.

**Example:**
```Java
public class ClassName {
    int x;
    String y;
}
```

**Example Usage**
```Java
ClassName myObject = new ClassName();

System.out.println(myObject.x); // 0
System.out.println(myObject.y); // null
```

### **Instance Fields** 
are variables that are declared within a class but outside of any method, constructor, or block. They are initialized when the class is instantiated.
- Instance Variables represent the key value pairs of a class.

Instance Fields can be set in three different ways: 
1. IF the instance fields are public they can be set directly.

2. IF the instance fields are private they can be set using the constructor method.

3. IF the instance fields are private they can be set using setter methods.

**Example:**
```Java
public class ClassName {
    // fields (variables)
    int x;
    String y;
}
```

Accessing these values from an instantiated object is done by using the object name followed by a period and the field name which is known as the dot operator.

**Example:**
```Java
ClassName myObject = new ClassName();
myObject.x = 5;
System.out.println(myObject.x); // 5
```

### **Parameters && Arguments**
placeholders that are replaced by actual values when the method is called. Parameters are used to pass values to methods.  

There are two types of parameters in Java: 
1. **formal parameters** - the parameters that are defined in the method signature
2. **actual parameters** - the parameters that are passed to the method when it is called

**Example:**
```Java
public ClassName(int x, String y) {
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
}
```

**Arguments** are the actual values that are passed to the method when it is called. Arguments are used to pass values to methods.

**Example:**
```Java
// 5 and "Hello" are arguments
ClassName myObject = new ClassName(5, "Hello");
```


### **Methods** 
used to define the behavior of a class. They are blocks of code that perform specific tasks. Methods are defined within a class and are called on objects of that class.

Methods have a **Signature** **which is the method name and the parameters that the method takes.** The signature of a method is used to identify the method and distinguish it from other methods in the program.

**Example:**
```Java
public void printValues(arg1, arg2) {
    x = arg1;
    y = arg2;
    System.out.println("x: " + x);
    System.out.println("y: " + y);
}
```

### System.out.println(CustomClass)
When a class is passed to the `System.out.println()` method, the `toString()` method of the class is called. The `toString()` method is a method of the `Object` class that returns a string representation of the object.

The `toString()` method can be overridden in a class to return a custom string representation of the object.

**Example:**
```Java
System.out.println(myObject);
// prints the string representation of the object in memory 
// ClassName@1b6d3586

// override the toString() method
@Override
public String toString() {
    return "x: " + x + ", y: " + y;
}

// alterntaively the toString() method can be redifined to return a string representation of the objeect in the class definition

public class House {
    int rooms;
    int bathrooms;
    int floors;

    public House(int rooms, int bathrooms, int floors) {
        this.rooms = rooms;
        this.bathrooms = bathrooms;
        this.floors = floors;
    }

    @Override
    public String toString() {
        return "Rooms: " + rooms + ", Bathrooms: " + bathrooms + ", Floors: " + floors;
    }
}
```

### Initialize a New Object from a Class

To create a new object from a class, the `new` keyword is used followed by the class name and parentheses. The parentheses are used to pass arguments to the constructor of the class.

**Example:**
```Java
ClassName myObject = new ClassName(5, "Hello");
```

**When a new object is created from a class, the constructor of the class is called and ALL instance fields NEED to be initialized.**

### Scanner Class

The Scanner class is used to get user input in Java. It is a part of the java.util package.

To create a new Scanner, the Scanner must be given a name specific to the program and the System.in object as an argument.
- System.in is an object that represents the standard input stream, in this case, the console where inputs are made.

The scanner class has different methods which are used for different purposes.

| Method | Description |
| --- | --- |
| next() | Reads the next token from the input |
| nextLine() | Reads the next line of text from the input |
| nextInt() | Reads the next integer from the input |
| nextDouble() | Reads the next double from the input |
| nextBoolean() | Reads the next boolean from the input |
| hasNext() | Returns true if there is another token in the input |
| nextFloat() | Reads the next float from the input |
| hasNextLine() | Returns true if there is another line of text in the input |
| hasNextInt() | Returns true if there is another integer in the input |
| hasNextDouble() | Returns true if there is another double in the input |
| hasNextBoolean() | Returns true if there is another boolean in the input |
| close() | Closes the scanner |

- in this case token simply refers to keywords, identifiers, literals, and operators that are used in a program.

**Example:**
```Java
import java.util.Scanner;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
  // Create a Scanner object
    Scanner scanner = new Scanner(System.in);
    // Prompt the user for input via the console
    System.out.println("Enter your name: ");
    // Get the user's input
    String name = scanner.nextLine();
    // Print a greeting to the console
    System.out.println("Hello, " + name + "!");
  }
}
```
- The `Scanner` class is imported from the `java.util` package.
- A `Scanner` object is created using the `new` keyword.
    - The method of creating an object from a class is called instantiation where the class is invoked (Scanner), named (scanner), and assigned to a variable (new Scanner(System.in)).
- The `nextLine()` method, which is part of the scanner class, is used to get the user's input.



## Methods
A method is a block of code that performs a specific task. It is a set of code that is referred to by name and can be called (invoked) at any point in a program simply by utilizing the method's name. Methods are used to perform certain actions, and they are also known as functions.

### Method declaration 

The method declaration is similar to a function declaration or a method signature. It consists of the method name, return type, and parameters.
```Java
public void myMethod(int x, String y) {
    // code to be executed
}
```

The methods availability is determined by the **access modifier**. The access modifier specifies the level of access for the method. 
- The `public` access modifier specifies that the method is accessible from any other class.
- The `private` access modifier specifies that the method is only accessible within the same class.

The **return type** specifies the data type of the value that the method returns. If the method does not return a value, the return type is `void`.
- **void** is a keyword that is used to define a method that does not return a value.
- alternatives can include:
    - double    
    - int
    - String
    - boolean
- If the return type is not void, the method **MUST** return a value of the specified data type.

**Example**
```Java
public String myMethod(int x, String y) {
    // code to be executed
    if (x > 0) {
        return "Hello, " + y + "!";
    } else {
        return "Goodbye, " + y + "!";
    }
}
```

The method declaration also includes the method name and the parameters that the method takes. The parameters are enclosed in parentheses and separated by commas.
- **myMethod** is the name of the method.

The **Naming Conventions** for methods to use a verb which defines the action being performed by the method and should be in camelCase. 

**Parameters** are added to the method with both the data type they need to be and the name of the parameter.
- **(dataType parameter1,dataType parameter2** are space holders for the values that will be passed to the method when it is called.


### **Static vs Non-Static**

**Static** methods are associated with a class and belong to that class rather than an object. A static method can be shared among all instances of a class.  
Static methods are declared with the static keyword. The static keyword refers to the fact that the method does not change when a new class is instantiated. The value of a static method is the same for all instances of the class.


- **Non-Static** methods are associated with an object and belong to that object. A non-static method can only be called on an instance of a class instead of the class itself.  
Non-static methods are declared without the static keyword. The non-static keyword refers to the fact that the method changes when a new class is instantiated. The value of a non-static method is unique to each instance of the class.

**Analogy**
> **Static as cable TV:**
> There’s one broadcast on channel 3, and everyone sees the same content.
> Just like a static field or method is shared by all instances, there’s one piece of data or code accessible to everyone.

> **Non-static as personalized streaming (Hulu):**
> Each person chooses their own show independently, and each stream is unique to their account.
> Just like an instance field or method, each object has its own state, and they can do things independently of other objects.

### Calling Methods

When a non-static method is added to a class, it becomes available to use on an object of that class. In order for methods to be executed, they must be called on an object of the class.

This refers to create a new object from the class. When that object is created it automatically has access to the methods defined for the defualt or unalterd class.

**Example:**
```Java
// Defining the Class Method 
public class ClassName {
    // instance fields 
    String name;

    // constructor method 
    public ClassName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    // instance method
    public void myMethod() {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    }
}
```

**Example Usage**
```Java
// Creating a new object from the class
ClassName myObject = new ClassName("Grant");

// Calling the method on the object
myObject.myMethod();

// prints hello world to the console
```

### Adding Parameters to Methods



## Scope 

Scope defines where variables, methods, and classes are accessible in a program. The scope of a variable, method, or class is determined by where it is declared.

- **Class Scope** - Variables, methods, and classes that are declared at the class level are accessible throughout the class.
- **Method Scope** - Variables that are declared within a method are only accessible within that method.
- **Block Scope** - Variables that are declared within a block of code (e.g., within curly braces) are only accessible within that block.

## System Class
The `System` class in Java provides methods for getting the current date and time. The `System` class is part of the `java.lang` package, which is automatically imported into every Java program.

### System Date and Time Methods



## Non-Primitive Data Types
Non-primitive data types are used to store complex data types such as arrays, classes, and interfaces. Non-primitive data types are also known as reference types because they store references to objects in memory.

Non-Primitve Data Types cannot use the same methods of checking for equality, arithmetic operations, and other operations as primitive data types.

These Reference Type objects use a specific set of methods to check whether they function in a way that makes sense.

### Strings

Strings are used to store sequences of characters. In Java, strings are objects of the `String` class, which is part of the `java.lang` package. Strings are immutable, meaning that their values cannot be changed once they are created.

**Strings can be initialized in two ways:**
```Java
// String literal
String myString = "Hello, World!";

// String object
String myString = new String("Hello, World!");
```

### String Concatenation
String concatenation is the process of combining two or more strings into a single string. In Java, the `+` operator is used to concatenate strings.

```Java
String firstName = "John";
String lastName = "Doe";
String fullName = firstName + " " + lastName;
System.out.println(fullName); // John Doe
```

### Reading a String from the Console

The `Scanner` class in Java is used to get user input. 

The `nextLine()` method of the `Scanner` class is used to read a string from the console. A string is defined as a sequence of characters separated by a newline character.

```Java
Scanner scanner = new Scanner(System.in);
System.out.println("Enter a string of text: ");
String myString = scanner.nextLine();
$ My name is Grant
System.out.println(myString); // My name is Grant
// collects the entire line of text regardless of white space
```

The `next()` method of the `Scanner` class is used to read a single word from the console. A word is defined as a sequence of characters separated by whitespace.

```Java
Scanner scanner = new Scanner(System.in);
System.out.println("Enter a word: ");
String myWord = scanner.next();
$ Hello, these are words
System.out.println(myWord); // Hello,
// leaves off anythong following the first whitespace
```

### Comparing Strings 

Strings can be compared using multiple string methods. 

| Method | Description | Example | Returns |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| equals() | Compares the values of two strings | str1.equals(str2) | true |
| equalsIgnoreCase() | Compares the values of two strings, ignoring case | str1.equalsIgnoreCase(str2) | true |
| compareTo() | Compares two strings lexicographically | str1.compareTo(str2) | 0 if equal, -1 if less than, 1 if greater than |
| compareToIgnoreCase() | Compares two strings lexicographically, ignoring case | str1.compareToIgnoreCase(str2) | 0 if equal, -1 if less than, 1 if greater than |
| startsWith() | Checks if a string starts with a specified prefix | str1.startsWith("Hello") | true |
| endsWith() | Checks if a string ends with a specified suffix | str1.endsWith("World!") | true |
| contains() | Checks if a string contains a specified sequence of characters | str1.contains("World") | true |

### Index of a Character in a String

There are multiple methods that can be used to find the index of a character in a string.

In any of these methods, a string `s` or character `c` is passed as an argument to the method. 
- The method will return the index of the first occurrence of the string or character in the string. 
- The second argument that can be used is the index `fromIndex` which specifies the index at which the search should begin.
    - the second argument can always be left off

**Example:** 
```Java
String str = "Hello, World!";
String str2 = "World";

str.indexOf('H'); // 0
str.indexOf('L', 4); // 9
str.lastIndexOf('l'); // 10
str.indexOf(str2); // 7
```


| Method | Description | Example | Returns |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| indexOf() | Returns the index of the first occurrence of a character or string | str.indexOf('H') | 0 |
| lastIndexOf() | Returns the index of the last occurrence of a character or string | str.lastIndexOf('l') | 2 |
| indexOf() | Returns the index of the first occurrence of a character or string starting from a specified index | str.indexOf('L', 4) | 9 |

### Convert a String to a Number 

The `Integer` class in Java provides methods for converting strings to integers. The `Integer` class is part of the `java.lang` package, which is automatically imported into every Java program.

The `parseInt()` method of the `Integer` class is used to convert a string to an integer. The `parseInt()` method takes a string as an argument and returns an integer.

The `parseDouble()` method of the `Double` class is used to convert a string to a double. The `parseDouble()` method takes a string as an argument and returns a double.

**Example:**
```Java
String str = "123";
int num = Integer.parseInt(str);

String str2 = "3.14";
double pi = Double.parseDouble(str2);
```

### Format a String with printf()

`printf()` is a method of the `PrintStream` class that is used to format a string. The `printf()` method takes a format string and a list of arguments and returns a formatted string.

To use the format String class, simply start by using the `%` symbol followed by a letter that represents the data type of the value that will be passed to the method. 

For each formatted item in the string, a comma is used to separate the values that will be passed to the method.

| Format Specifier | Description | Example |  Output |
| --- | --- | --- |
| %s | String | printf("Hello", %s) | "Hello |
| %d | Integer | printf(5, %d) | 5 |
| %f | Float | printf(5.0, %f) | 5.0 |
| %c | Character | printf('A', %c) | A |    
| %b | Boolean | printf(true, %b) | true |
| %e | Scientific Notation | printf(5.0, %e) | 5.0e+00 |
| %x | Hexadecimal | printf(255, %x) | ff |

**Example:**
```Java
String name = "John";
int age = 25;
double height = 5.9;

System.out.printf("Name: %s, Age: %d, Height: %.2f", name, age, height);
// Name: John, Age: 25, Height: 5.90
```

### Object Methods and Properties
**equals()** is a method used to compare the values of two objects. It returns `true` if the values are equal and `false` if they are not.
```Java
String str1 = "Hello";
String str2 = "Hello";
System.out.println(str1.equals(str2)); // true
```
- alternatively the `==` operator ***CAN*** be used to compare strings but ***it is not recommended*** as it compares the memory location of the strings rather than the values of the strings.


